i just have done here is jenny harris
and also the prime minister boris
johnson with the latest briefing good
afternoon
and thank you for joining us this has
been
a big day and an emotional day
for millions of families up and down the
country children
see and play with their friends at
school for the first time in
months and although i know that some
will have been anxious as pupils always
are on the first day of term
i also know that the overwhelming
feeling
is one of relief and we all know that
the education of our children is so
important
that the greater risk now is keeping
them out of school
for a day longer i want to thank all the
teachers who've got their schools ready
and have been teaching throughout the
whole period whether that's remotely or
in person
your work has been astonishing and i
want to thank the parents and all those
who've been teaching
at home you've had to master zoom who
had to communicate every detail of the
syllabus from fronted adverbials
to quadratic equations and we all know
that the
so the burden has disproportionately
fallen on
on women often holding down jobs and
providing child care
at the same time so our job now
as as government is to build on
your efforts so that from now on our
school children not only catch up on
lost learning but take the biggest
possible step forwards
with a concerted national program
for educational recovery
it's thanks to all of you parents
teachers
pupils thanks to this huge national
effort to keep kids at home
that we have been able significantly to
reduce the spread of the virus
and so today we've been able to take
that
crucial first step on what we hope is
our
cautious but irreversible road map to
freedom
today allowing people to meet one on one
outside for the first time in months
allowing care home visits to take place
with all
appropriate precautions and this first
step on the roadmap
is made possible above all by our nhs
which has now vaccinated more than
one-third of the entire uk population
we take this step with confidence
because all four of the most vulnerable
groups have not only been vaccinated
in overwhelming numbers but it's now
three weeks since they've or at least
three weeks
since they've received their first dose
so that they'll be feeling
the full benefits of the vaccine
protection
we will continue on this road map
but we must remember that today's return
to schools will of course have an impact
on the spread of the virus
and so at all times and as we decide
on the next steps forward and when we
take them
we will be driven by the data and with
the number
of patients uh being admitted to
hospital with kovid each day
still around eight times higher than the
lows of last summer
it's more vital than ever to follow the
rules
hands face space and please continue to
stay at home
protect the nhs and save lives thank you
very much
i'm not going to hand over to jenny to
do the slides thank you prime minister
could i have the first slide please um
so what we can see here is a is a
pleasing picture but one which i think
still has some caution attached to it
uh um this shows the number of people
testing positive both by pcr
and lfd test for covid19 and the recent
seven-day average you can see is 5889.
now that case rate is still falling uh
it's below now
uh 100 per hundred thousand uh in every
region across the country
but it's not uniformly across the
country so it's really important
that we continue to practice social
distancing
uh hunt space and space as the prime
minister said and continue to observe
all of our hand washing as well
you can see that the rate is back now
about where it was
uh in the end of september so
still quite a high level this is a level
at which a new wave could easily take
off again from
uh and we need to persist with all of
those actions
uh next slide please
so this slide shows the number of people
in hospital with covid19 in the uk that
dotted line across the middle shows what
the first peak was
in about 21 000 on the 12th of april
and then the real height that it climbed
to
over the new year again it's back down
around 10 000. but this is still a
substantial strain
on the nhs and not one that we can
afford
to rise from again with any further
pandemic ways so we still you can see
that there is a lag
as we'd expect in the case numbers and
then that appearing in
our hospital rate so a good sign but
still some way to go
next slide please and the third slide we
have here shows
the number of deaths sadly of people who
had a positive test result and then died
within 28 days of that first test this
is reported up to the 8th of march and
again
it's really good to be able to see that
the average rate
seven day rate is now down to 206 deaths
we can see those characteristic
reporting blips
at the weekend where the rate's lower
which is why we have that rolling
average
and you can see now that again this is
falling right down
the the really good news here is that as
the vaccine starts to have effect in the
older people who've been vaccinated
first and are most vulnerable
that the the impact on the number of
deaths is starting to come down more
rapidly
than some of the other indicators and
one more slide i think please
and what we have here is a number of
people who've received a vaccination for
covid19 so
huge numbers and extremely fast progress
thanks to colleagues particularly in the
nhs but right around
the country and local authorities and
volunteers the blue bluey purple line is
those who've received their first dose
but if you look at the bottom of the
slide
you can see an orange line starting to
rise up and these are individuals
who've now come to the 12 week period
and have had their second dose as well
so these are each
individual counted we're now heading up
to 24 million on this and i think when
we
get a little bit further we'll be
heading right up towards
50 percent of our population so really
good news but while we're
understanding what the effect of vaccine
is on transmission
we anticipate this will have really good
impact on protecting
individuals from serious illness but we
still need to watch
and wait to see what's happening so
again the strong message is
keep practicing those social distancing
measures thank you
thanks very much jenny let's go to arjun
from watford
young people have been hit very hard as
a result of the panzerback however the
government has seemed to put us at the
bottom of the priority list
what is the government doing to ensure
that young people will be catered for
in terms of support for both now and the
after effects of when the pandemic is
over
arjun thank you very much the most
important thing that we
able to do today is to get young people
back into
uh into school obviously for all those
who are of of school age that makes a
a massive difference uh and uh i think
that that will
uh is something that is going to be a
really really welcome
uh to to to families up and down uh the
the country uh but the uh for for those
who
young people who are thinking about jobs
who are thinking about
uh their their futures uh clearly we
want to give you the
the maximum possible help and that's why
we have the kickstart funds
uh two billion pounds uh to help young
people specifically the 18 to 24
year old group arjun into work and
to make sure that we support businesses
now with special packages
to enable them to to take on young
people this is going to be
it's going to continue to be a tough
time uh for
for the country but i'm confident that
we'll be able to
to get through it very well and start to
have a a
real jobs-led recovery but for now we've
got to uh continue to to beat the
uh the pandemic uh arjun uh that's not
in any way to underestimate the
uh the pressure young people have under
have been under i do understand how
tough it has been
obviously particularly for the
university students who haven't had
anything like the
university experience that uh they would
have liked
but the faster we can get through it
uh and uh the more we can observe the
guidances
as jenny has has said working together
we'll be able to continue on
uh the cautious but irreversible road
map and
uh and give young people the the freedom
uh that they need uh let's go to phoebe
from
from leeds i've been hearing a lot about
vaccine passports to allow british
tourists to travel again
but i'm just wondering how this is gonna
work for under 16s
i can imagine this is a question on a
lot of people's minds and we're all just
so eager to start booking our holidays
again
phoebe a really excellent question about
vaccine passports and how they work for
under-16s were looking at
the way these types of vaccination
certificates
might work they do raise all sorts of uh
issues uh for those who like under 16
year olds who
who might not uh have had a vaccination
for one reason
or another though those who aren't
medically able to get
a vaccination for instance there are
some uh some complexities we're looking
at what they're
they're thinking of in other countries
and we'll be making sure we report back
to you
uh as soon as we to everybody as soon as
we possibly can as you know
as you may know uh work is being done by
uh by
by michael gove the chance of the duchy
of lancaster on that on that whole
issue it's a novel one for our country
we've never had uh
this type of question before within the
domestic uh
uk uh economy within our own uh home
market though clearly
uh vaccine passports as an idea uh are
not new
when it comes to international travel
there have been certificates for things
like
uh yellow fever and and other diseases
in the past and i'm sure
that that will be a feature of our life
in the future
uh uh ben wright of the bbc
thank you a question to both of you
first now that schools in england have
reopened do you accept that infection
rate levels will go up
and what would be an acceptable level
and a second question to the prime
minister please
in their interview harry and megan claim
the royal family
failed to look after their mental health
and that an unnamed member of the family
asked how dark their son archie's skin
might be
what did you think when you heard those
comments and should buckingham palace
investigate the allegations
ben thank you very much uh look on your
on your second
question perhaps the best thing i can
say is that i've always had the highest
admiration for the queen and the
unifying role that she
plays in our country and across the
commonwealth and
as for uh the rest of all other matters
to do with the
royal family i've spent a long time
uh now not uh commenting on royal family
matters and i don't intend uh to depart
from that
today and on your quest your question
about
you know uh the the budget of risk
involved
in opening up schools which i actually
referred to
earlier on we do accept i think jenny
that of course
there will be a risk of increased
uh transmission that's inevitable uh if
you open up
schools for millions of kids across the
uh the country that is going to
to happen but we think that we can do it
now in the way that we are because we
have the
proportion of the population vaccinated
that i that i described the groups
wonderful
and now having had the the immunity uh
bedded in after at least three weeks and
we think it is
it is prudent uh to be able to do so
but as i said to earlier on uh we will
continue to be driven
by data and not dates and
as we approach uh the next steps april
the 12th may the 17th
uh june the 21st we'll we will continue
to assess where we've
where we've got to the data on the
vaccinations and the the impact that
they're having is
is very encouraging but we have to
remain very very cautious
um well exactly as the prime minister
said we do expect there to be an impact
on our and i think
um people will probably have have seen
some of the sage comments on that but
clearly education is of critical public
health importance
uh just as much as uh covid is
um and so what we do know is or at least
we can't disentangle
the social interaction element uh of
that rise in our so it's just as likely
it's people meeting
at school gates or the different numbers
of social interactions
as much as it is in school so i think
the critical point is
there are new interventions so the
testing for schools
is in place uh starting from now and
gradually for for some senior pupils
going forward
what that's likely to do is diminish the
number of
community transmission cases which could
come into school so schools will be
inherently safer places but equally it
will reach back into families
so although i suspect we may see a rise
at the start with luck as we go forward
and people get used to using that
testing
whole families will be protected as well
and the whole issue about vaccination of
course is we have now protected
the most vulnerable individuals as we
come down the age groups and into those
with underlying
health conditions and so the impact on
our hospitals going forward is likely to
be significantly less
thank you robert peston idv good
afternoon prime minister jenny harris
um prime minister is this the moment to
spend 200 000 pounds on the
refurbishment of your downing street
flat and
have any of the bills been settled by
the conservative party or private donors
and with the vaccination program being
significantly accelerated since you
uh prepared your road to
releasing the lockdown measures won't
you consider
speeding up the release of lockdown
measures
well uh thank you very much uh robert
and uh
on on your on your first point all i can
say is all such
uh inquiries will be uh answered with
the
normal declarations in the in in the
normal way
and on your on your second question
about accelerating
the um the timetable and the
and the the road map uh people have
asked us to do this uh many times
and and of course i understand the
the urgency that people feel but
we have to be driven by the data we we
have to look at the
the rates of infection uh don't forget
they're still
very high by the standards of of last
year
we still have thousands of people in
hospital uh with kovid and
we've seen uh alas in other european
countries
uh that the curve is is going up again
and we remember frankly what happened
uh every time we've seen those upward
curves in
uh in our friends and neighbors that uh
it's not too long
after that that we see an increase in
this country
as well and so we just got to remain
prudent and the whole point about this
uh roadmap robert is it's intended to be
cautious but
irreversible and we think we can do that
because of the
success of the of the vaccine rollout
that you
that you rightly describe but i think
people would really rather trade
um some uh some urgency in some some
haste
in favor of uh security uncertainty
about those dates that we've
uh that we've set out april the 12th may
the 17th uh june the 21st and
uh and so on thanks robert
uh ben kentish of lbc thank you prime
minister two questions for you if i may
firstly a couple of weeks ago on the
issue of financial support for people
who are having to self-isolate you said
we'd hear more from the chancellor last
week
we didn't hear any more on that it's
something that your scientific advisors
have called for repeatedly that the head
of test and trace has said
suggested is necessary will we he here
more on that issue or do you think those
advisors
are wrong on that and secondly if i
could just follow up on on robert's
question you said that the roadmap would
be guided by the data
at the moment it's guided by data that
is overly pessimistic we know the
vaccine rollout has been better
vaccines are more effective the number
of people in hospital is at the lower
end of what was predicted in those
models
if it is truly guided by data will it be
assessed at regular intervals to make
sure that we're not
prolonging the resumption of normality
and the economic damage
that goes with that the longer than the
science says is necessary thank you
yeah thanks so much ben the uh
what what we're doing in addition to
help people to to solve isolate in
addition to the
uh the um the 500 pounds
support and and all the rest of it is
giving money particularly to councils
uh i have a figure of 170 million pounds
more
in my head to support them uh to to help
them
uh give uh people who who who really
need it to
uh to self-isolate and that that's
that's one of the that's that's
uh possibly what i was referring to last
time that we
uh that we talked and on uh
your your question about um being driven
by the
uh by the data and and the data now
being positive
um i look i i accept that and i i agree
that there are some encouraging signs
but
the whole point is um you know we
remember where we were uh last summer we
had the
disease down to levels much below where
it is
today and then we saw what happened uh
with the
with the spike and uh
i i think it's fantastic that the
vaccine rollout is proving
so successful but don't forget that
there is a big budget of risk involved
in opening
schools uh today in the way that uh
that we are that's that's just
inevitable you heard what jenny had to
say about
uh the effect on the art we think it's
we think it's manageable we think it's
right we think we're prudent
uh to be doing what we are as i say i
think the the biggest risk is
is not opening schools now but we'll
we'll continue
uh to take a cautious and prudent
approach because i think that is
really what uh what i think business uh
british business
would really rather see a cautious and
irreversible approach rather than a
a hasty approach that we have to we have
to reverse
should i just uh just adding to that i
think perhaps what
people are not always aware of is the
proportion of the population who are
still left even though we have a
brilliant vaccination program rolling
out
there will still be a large proportion
of the population left who could become
infected in the future so we clearly
need to push the vaccination
program right out we have to keep
looking for new variants that's another
important element
as to why we need to wait and check and
we are
actually in the uk doing more genomics
than anywhere
else in the world and that's an
important area to look at but keep
observing
and then we need that time period
there's a there's a two week to illness
and a two week to hospitalization so
that four to five week assessment period
is absolutely critical to know
that the intervention that has gone in
and the result
are linked not to have multiple
interventions and then be confused at
what we've
actually managed to achieve thanks a lot
to harry cole
the son thank you prime minister a
question for dr harry's um education
unions have said this morning they can
foresee
schools reclosing at some point again do
you foresee that happening
and a question for the prime minister
the world's media is wall-to-wall
with accusations of britain as an
unwelcoming and racist country today
has that damaged this nation and do you
believe that the royal family queen
aside
is racist
i'll start with the the education
question so um the answer short answer
is hopefully not
because our children's education is so
critical which is why at schools
uh the development first we had a
question early on uh just highlighting i
think how young people have been
affected through through
the pandemic so um i would certainly not
want that to happen but i think we can
be very
optimistic going forward um we for all
of the reasons i've said earlier around
our vaccination programmes
and the surveillance that we have in
operation
the testing program in school should
mean that
the likelihood of a case going into the
school and then
numbers of children having to come out
of education to isolate should be
very significantly reduced now there may
be you know just a
full warning here there may be a very
short period at the start of this
program where everybody gets used to it
and a larger number of children come out
of school and then it will settle down
so i think it's really important that
when observing this
uh people think through the next three
to four weeks uh not the first one to
two
and uh harry on your on your other point
and look
you know i congratulate you on your very
determined attempt to uh
to involve me in in this in this story
more than
uh than i've said all already but i
really think that when it comes to
uh matters to do with the royal family
uh the right thing for prime ministers
to say is uh
is nothing and nothing is the thing that
i propose uh to say today about that
about that particular matter thank you
very much let's go to
dominic yeatman of the metro hi thank
you prime minister
your education secretary yesterday
promised the biggest shake-up since the
war
uh with longer school days in a
five-term year among the measures
suggested in a bid to
help children catch up on their missed
education
when can parents and teachers expect to
see these plans
and secondly if i may is three pounds 50
a week extra an appropriate reward
for the nurses who are steering britain
out of this pandemic
uh dominic first of all on on your point
about i'll come to i'll come to the
education
uh recovery plan but on your point about
about
about nurses i i would stress that
well first of all the gratitude that i
think everybody feels for
uh to towards the nursing profession
and all health and social care workers
one of the most important things that
nurses tell me they want to see is is
is more nurses on to help them on the
wards uh
to help them cope with uh the pandemic
and everything else and there are ten
thousand more
now this year than there were last year
and that's
that's a good thing there's also a big
increase in recruitment by the way i
think it's up
something like 36 percent and
uh i understand of course that
the whole sector has been under massive
pressure and that's why
we are investing uh colossally on top of
uh the uh 140 billion pounds annually
that we give to the nhs but
an extra 62 billion pounds uh to support
the nhs
and above all to help boost that
recruitment drive that i think is
is really crucial for the well-being uh
of of nurses um uh
across the country in addition to the of
course to the 12.8 percent
uh pay increase that they got uh the
most recent
uh the most recent run so uh that that's
where we are
dominic on on that and on your on your
uh
excellent question about um the school's
recovery plan
i would echo what uh the secretary of
state for education said
this is this is a a huge moment we have
to recognize that
parents uh up and down the country
teachers who have been coping with
absolutely exceptional circumstances
some pupils have had differential loss
of
learning uh they've for one reason or or
another they've been more disadvantaged
by the pandemic than uh than others we
have to make up
that lost learning we have to be very
creative and very direct
in the way that we do it so one of the
things that we're looking at and that uh
sir kevin collins the education recovery
commissioner
is is looking at is is tutoring and
uh what you can do to make a difference
uh one-on-one
uh with uh with pupils and um that might
apply to
to kids who who have fallen behind or
kids who just need their potential
uh um unleash in all sorts of ways uh
we're also looking
as as as we've said at
uh the whole uh curriculum making sure
that we do as much as we can to
give kids the opportunities that they
need so the the
a lot of work is going to be done on
this and as i said i think at one of
these
press conferences recently i think that
actually it is our biggest
national uh challenge uh yes we've got
to
defeat the backlog in the nhs in the
courts all the
all the problems that have have built up
uh that have silted up as a result of
of kovid but i think the biggest
challenge now is
uh remediating the the the damage done
to the education of of kids and young
people
in this country i know we can do it i
absolutely know we can do it
but it's going to take a lot of focus
and a lot of a lot of drive and that's
why we've
appointed kevin uh and and his team
okay um sorry jenny was there a question
for you
i don't think i do thank you sorry thank
you dominic um
andrew woodcock the independent
good afternoon um dr harris um if i
could ask you first
we're hearing um reports of fairly large
numbers of parents
failing to give permission for their
children to be tested when they return
to school
what i'd like to ask is are those
children undermining the safety of their
classmates when they're together in the
classroom
should they be kept separate from their
classmates and
prime minister if i may follow some of
my colleagues in uh straying off the
subject with coronavirus for a second
um you are currently threatening for the
second time to unilaterally breach
terms of the northern ireland protocol
which um which you negotiated and you
signed as part of your brexit deal
and we hear that you may be planning to
do the same thing with regards to
imports from the eu to mainland britain
um you said at the time of the deal it
was a great deal you said that there
were no non-tariff barriers you told
north irish businessmen that they could
throw any customs forms in the bin
and yet yesterday lord frost your
minister wrote
that at the time of the negotiations
that it was clear that there was
no world in which the eu would eliminate
trade barriers
um isn't it time now for you to come
clean with voters and and admit that um
all of these problems are not teething
problems that that but that their the
trade barriers and the damage they cause
are part and parcel of your brexit deal
i'll start with the the school testing
response um
so i think the first important thing to
say is children should always be allowed
to come into school it's their right to
have an education and it's important for
their long-term health and actually
their future family's health
so that i think is the first point um i
do recognize that for many parents it's
quite an unusual
ask for you know before children go off
to school to do
to do a swab and a test it will take
time i think for families to get used to
that and one of the reasons that the
testing has been put in
in in a phased way is so that children
have three tests
in school in a supervised way with
support so that they know
what to expect and my experience was
once the child knows what they want to
do actually
as a parent you had less control over it
they actually saw what the benefits were
and were not frightened of it
i know that many of the testing centres
are offering opportunities
for parents and for families to get used
to
the testing or to seek any help and i
think with time i'm sure families will
give their permission
and will adopt it partly because
actually it's not just for the child and
the school
but it's actually for their families
benefit as well if they have
elderly relatives in the family it gives
that whole family assurance as well so
children will never be forced to have a
test they cannot have a test without
the appropriate permission but i think
the important thing is
for for parents to ask if they're
concerned about it um and
people will help them understand what
the test is about
thanks very much andrew on your on your
question about the the northern irish
protocol and the
and the the trading cooperation
agreement with our friends in the in the
eu i think it is a great deal because
uh it enables us not just to have
uh free trade with the eu but also to do
what
uh we wanted to do which is do things
differently where we
i think that might be a good idea and uh
in the last few
months you've seen the examples of that
whether it's in the in the vaccination
uh rollout program or in free trade
agreements that we've been able to
to strike or the free ports that we
announced in the in the budget or doing
uh other forms of regulation uh
differently and and i and
i think that is a and it's great to get
those two things working
uh together that's a free trade
agreement plus the ability to do things
uh differently in in our in our own way
and
uh in so far as the there have been
uh teething problems and and and there's
no question that there
have been uh we're fixing those uh now
with some
temporary technical uh
things that we're doing to to smooth
flow which i think are very very
sensible
and i'm sure that it can all be
ironed out sorted out insofar as the eu
objects to that uh with um with good
will and
and with imagination and that's what we
intend uh to bring
uh to it and i'm sure that our friends
will as well so
uh you'll have to forgive me uh andrew
if i'm considerably more
optimistic about all that than perhaps
the turn of your question suggests that
uh
that you are at the moment but i think
you're going to be pleasantly surprised
uh as as things as common sense
uh begins to to prevail thank you all
very very much
and see you next time thank you
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news